Nextra 4 Blogpost (#1803)
the-guild-org/website: website/pages/blog/nextra-4/index.mdx

    </svg>
  )
}

export function Removed({ children }) {
  return (
    <span className="text-yellow-500">
      <ExclamationTriangleIcon height="15" className="inline" /> Removed
      {children && <>. {children}</>}
    </span>
  )
}

export function Video({ src, alt }) {
  return (
    <figure>
      <video autoPlay="autoplay" loop muted playsInline className="mt-6 rounded-md">
        <source src={src} type="video/mp4" />
        Your browser does not support the video tag.
      </video>
      <figcaption className="mt-2 text-center text-sm">{alt}</figcaption>
    </figure>
  )
}

Nextra 4 just released, marking the largest update in its history, with a ton of exciting
improvements. Here's what's new:

## App Router Support

> [Pages Router](https://nextjs.org/docs/pages) support has been removed, Nextra 4 is fully compatible
> with Next.js [App Router](https://nextjs.org/docs/app).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Nextra 4 exclusively uses Next.js [App Router](https://nextjs.org/docs/app). Support for the [Pages Router](https://nextjs.org/docs/pages) has been discontinued.
```

### New 2 Rendering Modes

#### `content` Directory Convention

> The first mode is the easiest way to migrate your existing Nextra website from Pages router. To do
> follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Migrate your Pages Router site with minimal changes using this mode. Here's what to do:
```

})
```

<h5>Add `[[...mdxPath]]/page.jsx` file</h5>

Place this file in `app` directory with
[the following content](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/blob/d5cb1bc0e84494cbcc8decbae56fb091ce9999f0/examples/docs/app/%5B%5B...mdxPath%5D%5D/page.jsx),
you should get the following structure:

<FileTree>
  <FileTree.Folder name="app" open>
    <FileTree.File name="layout.jsx" />
    <FileTree.Folder name="[[...mdxPath]]" open active>
      <FileTree.File name="page.jsx" active />
    </FileTree.Folder>
    <FileTree.Folder name="content" open>
      <FileTree.File name="index.mdx" />
      <FileTree.Folder name="docs" open>
        <FileTree.File name="index.mdx" />
        <FileTree.File name="getting-started.mdx" />
      </FileTree.Folder>
    </FileTree.Folder>
  </FileTree.Folder>
</FileTree>

<Callout>
**Tip**

Consider the single catch-all route `[[...mdxPath]]/page.jsx` as a gateway to your `content`
directory.

If you set `contentDirBasePath` option in `next.config` file, you should put
`[[...mdxPath]]/page.jsx` in the corresponding directory.

</Callout>

<h5>You are ready to go!</h5>

<Callout type='info'>
**Note**

> In Web you can found article such as
> [Refreshing the Next.js App Router When Your Markdown Content Changes](https://steveruiz.me/posts/nextjs-refresh-content)
> where you need to install unnecessary dependency like `concurrently` and `ws`, mentioned article is
> adapted on
> [Dan Abramov workaround with `<AutoRefresh>` component and dev web socket server](https://github.com/hashicorp/next-remote-watch/issues/42#issuecomment-1794052655).
> Nextra's `content` mode provide ultimate DX:
> 
> - you don't need to install unnecessary dependencies
> - you don't need to restart your server on changes in `content` directory
> - hot reloading works out of box
> - you can use `import` statements in MDX files and
>   [static images](https://nextra.site/docs/guide/image#static-image) works as well
> 
> See Nextra's
> [example of docs website](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/tree/d5cb1bc0e84494cbcc8decbae56fb091ce9999f0/examples/docs)
> and
> [i18n website example](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/tree/d5cb1bc0e84494cbcc8decbae56fb091ce9999f0/examples/swr-site)
> as an examples of this mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many existing solutions
[Refreshing the Next.js App Router When Your Markdown Content Changes](https://steveruiz.me/posts/nextjs-refresh-content), rely on extra dependencies like `concurrently` and `ws`. These approaches include 
[Dan Abramov workaround with `<AutoRefresh>` component and dev web socket server](https://github.com/hashicorp/next-remote-watch/issues/42#issuecomment-1794052655).

Nextra's content mode delivers a streamlined solution right out of the box: no extra dependencies, instant hot reloading, and full MDX support including working import statements and static images!

Checkout Nextra's [docs website](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/tree/d5cb1bc0e84494cbcc8decbae56fb091ce9999f0/examples/docs) and [i18n website example](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/tree/d5cb1bc0e84494cbcc8decbae56fb091ce9999f0/examples/swr-site).
```

</Callout>

</Steps>

#### `page` File Convention

> The second mode follows
> [Next.js App Router convention](https://nextjs.org/docs/getting-started/project-structure#app-routing-conventions)
> but with enhanced page extensions as `page.{md,mdx}` and don't requires additional steps to setup.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second mode follows
[Next.js App Router convention](https://nextjs.org/docs/getting-started/project-structure#app-routing-conventions) with ✨ enhanced page extensions `page.{md,mdx}`.
```

Above [`content` directory convention structure](#add-mdxpathpagejsx-file), with this mode will
looks like:

<FileTree>
  <FileTree.Folder name="app" open>
    <FileTree.File name="layout.jsx" />
    <FileTree.File name="page.jsx" active />
    <FileTree.Folder name="docs" open>
      <FileTree.File name="page.mdx" active />
      <FileTree.Folder name="getting-started" open>
        <FileTree.File name="page.mdx" active />
      </FileTree.Folder>
    </FileTree.Folder>
  </FileTree.Folder>
</FileTree>

<Callout>
**Warning**

All pages `page.{jsx,tsx}` should export
[`metadata` object](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/building-your-application/optimizing/metadata#static-metadata).

</Callout>

<Callout type="info">
**Note**

See
[Nextra website](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/tree/d5cb1bc0e84494cbcc8decbae56fb091ce9999f0/docs)
or Nextra's
[blog example](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/tree/d5cb1bc0e84494cbcc8decbae56fb091ce9999f0/examples/blog)
as an examples of this mode.

</Callout>

## Turbopack Support

> After [more than 2 years of requesting this feature](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/issues/1054),
> Nextra 4 supports [Turbopack](https://nextjs.org/docs/architecture/turbopack), incremental bundler
> written in Rust. To benefit it, simple append the `--turbopack` flag to your development command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After being one of our [most requested features](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/issues/1054) for over 2 years, Nextra 4 finally supports Turbopack, the Rust-based incremental bundler. Enable it by adding `--turbopack` to your dev command:
```

```diff filename="package.json"
"scripts": {
-  "dev": "next dev"
+  "dev": "next dev --turbopack"
}
```

> <Callout type="info">
> **Note**
> 
> Without `--turbopack` flag Next.js under the hood uses
> [Webpack](https://github.com/webpack/webpack), written in JavaScript.
> 
> </Callout>

Reviewer: I don't think it is really necessary. I have seen turbopack have some weird issues so would say webpack way is still the most stable option.   
```suggestion
```

Author: Why? Just tip for users that without turbopack - JavaScript powered Webpack is used 😅

<Callout type='warning'>
**Warning**

Only serializable options are supported:

At the time of writing this blog **only JSON serializable values** can be passed in `nextra`
function. This mean that with Turbopack enabled you can't pass custom `remarkPlugins`,
`rehypePlugins` or `recmaPlugins` since they are functions.

The following options could be passed only without Turbopack or only while building your app with
`next build`
([since Turbopack isn't support `next build` for now](https://nextjs.org/docs/architecture/turbopack#unsupported-features)
and Webpack is used instead).

```js filename="next.config.mjs" {5-7}
import nextra from 'nextra'

const withNextra = nextra({
  mdxOptions: {
    remarkPlugins: [myRemarkPlugin],
    rehypePlugins: [myRehypePlugin],
    recmaPlugins: [myRecmaPlugin]
  }
})
```

If you try to pass them, you'll get an error from Turbopack:

```text copy=false
Error: loader nextra/loader for match "./{src/app,app}/**/page.{md,mdx}" does not have serializable options.
Ensure that options passed are plain JavaScript objects and values.
```

</Callout>

> ## Drop Support of `theme.config` Files

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Discontinuing `theme.config` Support
```

   ```

1. Indexing static pages written in JavaScript or TypeScript.

   ```jsx filename="page.jsx" /data-pagefind-body/ /data-pagefind-ignore/
   export default function Page() {
     return (
       // All content of tags with `data-pagefind-body` attribute will be indexed
       <ul data-pagefind-body>
         <li>Nextra 4 is the best MDX Next.js library</li>
         {/* Except for tags with `data-pagefind-ignore` attribute */}
         <li data-pagefind-ignore>Nextra 3 is the best MDX Next.js library</li>
       </ul>
     )
   }
   ```

<Callout type='info'>
**Note**

1. No one of the above examples didn't work in previous versions of Nextra.
1. For JavaScript/TypeScript pages **you must add**
   [`data-pagefind-body` attribute](https://pagefind.app/docs/indexing/#limiting-what-sections-of-a-page-are-indexed)
   to tag your main content area which you want to index.
1. You can ignore indexing of specific tags by adding
   [`data-pagefind-ignore` attribute](https://pagefind.app/docs/indexing/#removing-individual-elements-from-the-index).
1. For MDX pages while using `nextra-theme-docs` and `nextra-theme-blog` **you don't need to add**
   `data-pagefind-body` attribute.

> </Callout>

Author: changed

release Nextra 3!

Huge thanks for Nextra sponsors:

- [GraphQL Hive – Open-source GraphQL platform](https://the-guild.dev/graphql/hive?utm_source=the-guild.dev&utm_campaign=nextra-4-blog&utm_content=blog_post)

- [Speakeasy – SDKs & Terraform Providers for Your API](https://speakeasy.com?utm_source=the-guild.dev&utm_campaign=nextra-4-blog&utm_content=blog_post)

- [xyflow - Node Based UIs for React and Svelte](https://xyflow.com/?utm_source=the-guild.dev&utm_campaign=nextra-4-blog&utm_content=blog_post)

Help spread the word about Nextra on [X](https://x.com) using the `#Nextra` hashtag. Also, feel free
to follow me on [X](https://x.com/dimaMachina_) and [GitHub](https://github.com/dimaMachina)!

---

[^1]: `import { Banner } from 'nextra/components'{:js}`

[^2]: `import { Head } from 'nextra/components'{:js}`

[^3]: `import { Navbar } from 'nextra-theme-docs'{:js}`

[^4]: `import { Layout } from 'nextra-theme-docs'{:js}`

[^5]: `import { LastUpdated } from 'nextra-theme-docs'{:js}`

[^6]: `import { Footer } from 'nextra-theme-docs'{:js}`

[^7]: `import { NotFoundPage } from 'nextra-theme-docs'{:js}`

[^8]: `import { Search } from 'nextra/components'{:js}`

> [^9]: `import { Comments } from 'nextra-theme-blog'{:js}`

Author: ty, it because table of migration was closed by default in `<details>` element, fixed in https://github.com/the-guild-org/website/pull/1803/commits/5471c6a511496ee01e263e1611e0a4b0e69359e0

[Dan Abramov workaround with `<AutoRefresh>` component and dev web socket server](https://github.com/hashicorp/next-remote-watch/issues/42#issuecomment-1794052655).

Nextra's content mode delivers a streamlined solution right out of the box:

- you don't need to install unnecessary dependencies
- you don't need to restart your server on changes in `content` directory
- hot reloading works out of the box
- you can use `import` statements in MDX files and
  [static images](https://nextra.site/docs/guide/image#static-image) works as well

Checkout Nextra's
[docs website](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/tree/d5cb1bc0e84494cbcc8decbae56fb091ce9999f0/examples/docs)
and
[i18n website example](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/tree/d5cb1bc0e84494cbcc8decbae56fb091ce9999f0/examples/swr-site).

</Callout>

</Steps>

#### `page` File Convention

The second mode follows
[Next.js App Router convention](https://nextjs.org/docs/getting-started/project-structure#app-routing-conventions)
with ✨ enhanced page extensions `page.{md,mdx}`.

Above [`content` directory convention structure](#add-mdxpathpagejsx-file), with this mode will

> looks like:

Reviewer 2: It looks like there's a typo in the url of the link

Author: nice catch, it because I removed Markdown heading (to avoid adding steps in TOC) and replaced by h5, fixed with 
<img width="603" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/4d9c2ba6-ab8f-481c-89c7-964b35545961" />

Author: fixed in https://github.com/the-guild-org/website/pull/1803/commits/bdb9ff0d06bf7302190ce890f3203e8b206cea76

<Callout type="info">
**Note**

All 4 examples were updated to the latest Next.js 15.1.3 at the moment of writing this blogpost.

</Callout>

### Docs Example

<details>
  <summary>Theme Docs with Nextra 3</summary>
  <DocsV3BundleSize />
</details>

<details>
  <summary>Theme Docs with **Nextra 4**</summary>
  <DocsV4BundleSize />
</details>

**First Load JS shared by all** is decreased by **36.9%** from **168 kB** to **106 kB**.

### I18n Docs Example

<details>
  <summary>I18n Theme Docs with Nextra 3</summary>
  <I18nDocsV3BundleSize />
</details>

<details>
  <summary>I18n Theme Docs with **Nextra 4**</summary>
  <I18nDocsV4BundleSize />
</details>

**First Load JS shared by all** is decreased by **38.7%** from **173 kB** to **106 kB**.

### Blog Example

<details>
  <summary>Theme Blog with Nextra 3</summary>
  <BlogV3BundleSize />
</details>
<details>
  <summary>Theme Blog with **Nextra 4**</summary>
  <BlogV4BundleSize />
</details>

**First Load JS shared by all** is decreased by **7.9%** from **114 kB** to **105 kB**.

<Callout type="info" emoji="🚀">
**Conclusion**

First Load JS is significantly decreased in all above examples.

</Callout>

## Remote Docs

> Configuration for remote docs was changed, please refers to
> [official example](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/blob/aca79fa5e224e861c253d0cae5bed91268804a19/examples/swr-site/app/%5Blang%5D/remote/graphql-eslint/%5B%5B...slug%5D%5D/page.tsx),
> also you will need to manually modify `pageMap` list in `layout` file, to properly display sidebar
> navigation links. Example of modified `layout` file is
> [here](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/blob/aca79fa5e224e861c253d0cae5bed91268804a19/examples/swr-site/app/%5Blang%5D/layout.tsx#L52-L56).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Remote docs configuration has changed, please refers to
[official example](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/blob/aca79fa5e224e861c253d0cae5bed91268804a19/examples/swr-site/app/%5Blang%5D/remote/graphql-eslint/%5B%5B...slug%5D%5D/page.tsx),
Additionally you will need to modify `pageMap` list in `layout` file, to properly display sidebar
navigation links. Example of modified `layout` file is
[here](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/blob/aca79fa5e224e861c253d0cae5bed91268804a19/examples/swr-site/app/%5Blang%5D/layout.tsx#L52-L56).
```

    </FileTree.Folder>
    <FileTree.File name="docs.mdx" active />
  </FileTree.Folder>
</FileTree>

This structure is incompatible with the [page file convention](#page-file-convention), to fix it a
new front matter option called `asIndexPage` has been introduced. You should set `asIndexPage: true`
in the front matter of `docs/page.mdx` to achieve the same effect.

<FileTree>
  <FileTree.Folder name="app" open>
    <FileTree.File name="layout.jsx" />
    <FileTree.Folder name="docs" open>
      <FileTree.File name="page.mdx" active />
      <FileTree.Folder name="getting-started" open>
        <FileTree.File name="page.mdx" />
      </FileTree.Folder>
    </FileTree.Folder>
  </FileTree.Folder>
</FileTree>

When using the [content directory convention](#content-directory-convention), you can achieve the
same result by setting `asIndexPage: true` in the front matter of `docs/index.mdx`

<FileTree>
  <FileTree.Folder name="content" open>
    <FileTree.Folder name="docs" open>
      <FileTree.File name="index.mdx" active />
      <FileTree.File name="getting-started.mdx" />
    </FileTree.Folder>
  </FileTree.Folder>
</FileTree>

#### List Subpages

> It's now possible to automatically list all subpages of a given route as cards.

Reviewer: Part of the code I think we should also so how it would look like in preview. You could add a screenshot alternatively just link to an example of some deployment where we can see this feature in action :)

Author: fixed in https://github.com/the-guild-org/website/pull/1803/commits/bdb9ff0d06bf7302190ce890f3203e8b206cea76

1. Provide `Cards` and your icons to `MDXRemote`'s components prop

<div className="mt-6 md:grid gap-4 grid-cols-2 [&_pre]:h-[calc(100%-48px)] [&>div]:!mt-0">

{/* prettier-ignore */}
```mdx filename="app/my-route/page.mdx"
import { Cards } from 'nextra/components'
import { MDXRemote } from 'nextra/mdx-remote'
import { createIndexPage, getPageMap } from 'nextra/page-map'
import { MyIcon } from '../path/to/your/icons'

<MDXRemote
  compiledSource={
    await createIndexPage(
      await getPageMap('/my-route')
    )
  }
  components={{
    Cards,
    MyIcon
  }}
/>
```

```mdx filename="app/my-route/demo/page.mdx"
---
icon: MyIcon
---

# My Subpage
```

</div>

### Sidebar Title Priority Changes

In Nextra 4, the sidebar title is now determined by the following order:

1. A non-empty title from the `_meta` file.
1. `sidebarTitle` in the front matter.
1. `title` in the front matter.
1. **New in Nextra 4:** The title derived from the first `h1` Markdown heading (e.g.
   `# Dima Machina`).
1. If none of the above are available, it falls back to the filename of the page, formatted
   according to [The Chicago Manual of Style](https://title.sh).

### Code Block Icons Changes

> #### Overriding Icons
> 
> You can now override or add additional icons for code blocks. Here is an example how to do it for
> `nextra-theme-docs`, but it's the same approach for custom themes. Import `withIcons` HOC function
> from `nextra/components`, Wrap the `Pre` component with `withIcons`, passing in your custom icon for
> the desired language.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Customizing Icons

You can now customize icons for code blocks. Here's an example for `nextra-theme-docs`, but the same approach applies to custom themes:

1. Import `withIcons` HOC function from `nextra/components`.
1. Wrap the `Pre` component with `withIcons`, passing your custom icon for the desired language.
```

I think the word "customize" is more appropriate than "override," and listing the steps might make it easier to read.

Author: nice, looks better!

```jsx filename="mdx-components.jsx"
import { useMDXComponents as useDocsMDXComponents } from 'nextra-theme-docs'
import { Pre, withIcons } from 'nextra/components'

const docsComponents = getDocsMDXComponents({
  pre: withIcons(Pre, { js: MyCustomIcon })
})

export function useMDXComponents(components) {
  return {
    ...docsComponents,
    ...components
    // ... your additional components
  }
}
```

> #### JSX Icons
> 
> The `jsx` and `tsx` languages now display the React icon for better visual identification.
> 
> #### Diff Icons
> 
> For code blocks with the diff language, if a
> [`filename` attribute](https://nextra.site/docs/guide/syntax-highlighting#filenames-and-titles) is
> provided, the icon will automatically correspond to the file extension of the specified filename.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Icons Updates

- **JSX icons**: The `jsx` and `tsx` languages now display the React icon for better visual identification.
- **Diff icons**: For code blocks with the `diff` language, if a
[`filename` attribute](https://nextra.site/docs/guide/syntax-highlighting#filenames-and-titles) is
provided, the icon will automatically correspond to the file extension of the specified filename.
```

I think categorizing under "Icons Updates" would make the TOC more intuitive.

Author: ty

1. He has been removed from `nextra/components` and moved to `nextra/mdx-remote`
1. You no longer need to manually pass your default components to `<MDXRemote>`. They will now be
   automatically provided from your [`mdx-components.jsx` file](#use-mdx-components).

### Optimized Imports

Imports from `nextra/components`, `nextra-theme-docs` and `nextra-theme-blog` are now optimized
internally with Next.js'
[`optimizePackageImports`](https://nextjs.org/docs/app/api-reference/config/next-config-js/optimizePackageImports)
option resulting in improved bundle size.

### Bump Minimal Next.js to V14

Nextra 4 requires at least Next.js 14 to be installed in your project.

### Update Your `tsconfig.json`

If you are using TypeScript and have `moduleResolution` set to `node`, you will receive type errors:

```text
Type error: Cannot find module 'nextra/components' or its corresponding type declarations.
```

`"typesVersions"` fields from `package.json`'s of Nextra packages were removed. You need to set
`"moduleResolution": "bundler"` in your `tsconfig.json`.

```diff filename="tsconfig.json"
{
  "compilerOptions": {
-   "moduleResolution": "node"
+   "moduleResolution": "bundler"
  }
}
```

> ## Conclusion. Why Prefer **Nextra 4** over Other MDX Libraries?

Reviewer: saying MDX libraries doesn't do justice since Nextra is more than MDX support :)

```suggestion
## Conclusion. Why Prefer **Nextra 4** over others?
```

MDX [`mdxjs-rs` parser](https://github.com/wooorm/mdxjs-rs). Share your thoughts as well.

## Credits

A sincere thank for
[the most active Nextra contributor](https://github.com/shuding/nextra/pulls?q=sort%3Aupdated-desc+is%3Apr+author%3A87xie),
I can even name him as a perfect example of a great Open Source contributor
[Oscar Xie](https://github.com/87xie)! His amazing contributions previously pushed me a lot to
release Nextra 3!

Huge thanks for Nextra sponsors:

- [GraphQL Hive – Open-source GraphQL platform](https://the-guild.dev/graphql/hive?utm_source=the-guild.dev&utm_campaign=nextra-4-blog&utm_content=blog_post)

- [Speakeasy – SDKs & Terraform Providers for Your API](https://speakeasy.com?utm_source=the-guild.dev&utm_campaign=nextra-4-blog&utm_content=blog_post)

- [xyflow - Node Based UIs for React and Svelte](https://xyflow.com/?utm_source=the-guild.dev&utm_campaign=nextra-4-blog&utm_content=blog_post)

<Callout type="error" emoji="❤️">
The Nextra 4 documentation is still a work in progress, and we need your help to improve it!<br />
Check out the recent updates in this blog post, and feel free to submit your contribution PRs to improve Nextra docs.

> Spread the word about Nextra on [X](https://x.com) using the `#Nextra` hashtag. You can also follow
> me on [X](https://x.com/dimaMachina_) and [GitHub](https://github.com/dimaMachina) to stay updated!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Spread the word about Nextra on [𝕏](https://x.com) using the `#Nextra` hashtag. You can also follow
me on [𝕏](https://x.com/dimaMachina_) and [GitHub](https://github.com/dimaMachina) to stay updated!
```
